---
title: "Module 0319: Introduction to algorithm design and pseudocoding"
---

# About this module

-   Prerequisites:

-   Objectives: This module explains the purpose of CISP300 and why
    pseudocode is used in this class.

# Algorithm and pseudocode

An algorithm is a specification of computations operations to accomplish
a particular objective. While algorithms can be expressed in many ways
in theory, the implementation of most programming languages share some
common traits.

For example, most programming languages are "sequential" in the sense
that a subsequent operation cannot start until the one before it is
completed. Algorithms do not inherently require this restriction applied
universally, but the implementation of processors and computers can only
perform operations sequentially (from the perspective of a processor
core). As a result, most practical programming languages incorporate
this restriction.

Other traits will be discussed in this class in steps.

Instead of using an existing programming language for this class,
pseudocode is used. Pseudocode literally means "pseudo" (not real)
"code" (algorithm steps). This means that pseudocode is not a real
programming language, and may never be understood by any computer. It
does not seem to make sense to learn programming without using an actual
programming language, right?

Pseudocode is used for two important reasons.

## You cannot run the program in a computer

Now why is that a "feature"?

When we learn concepts in programming, it is important to figure out
what a program is going to do using our minds instead of just running
the program to figure out what it does. The use of pseudocode makes sure
that programs cannot actually on a computer. This forces the programmer
to track down the execution of the code manually. It is by this means
the instructor can assess whether a concept is understood correctly.

## You cannot make syntax errors (easily)

Real programming languages have fairly strict syntax enforcement. This
means that if you forget to close a parenthesis, or use a comma instead
of a semi-colon, or use the wrong indentation, the computer reports a
"syntax error" and the code does not run.

Pseudocode has a more relaxed syntax because it only needs to be
understood by a person. As a result, small deviations from the ideal
syntax is not a big problem.

This helps to reduce the mental strain and stress originating from
writing syntactically perfect code so that more energy can be spent on
understanding concepts.
